ai/features/data-collection/index.md, before:

---
feature_group: kube9-operator-data-collection
---

# Data Collection Features

## Background

```gherkin
Background:
  Given the kube9 operator is running in a Kubernetes cluster
  And the operator has read access to cluster resources
  And the operator is configured with collection intervals
  And the operator can run in free tier (operated) or pro tier (enabled) mode
```

## Rules

```gherkin
Rule: Data collection respects tier mode
  Example: Free tier collection
    Given the operator is running in free tier (operated mode)
    When data is collected
    Then the data should be stored locally in the operator pod
    And the data should NOT be transmitted to kube9-server
    And the data should be available for local analysis only

  Example: Pro tier collection
    Given the operator is running in pro tier (enabled mode)
    And the operator has successfully registered with kube9-server
    When data is collected
    Then the data should be sanitized before transmission
    And the data should be validated against schema
    And the data should be transmitted to kube9-server via HTTPS POST
    And the transmission should include API key authentication

Rule: All collections use read-only operations
  Example: Cluster metadata collection
    Given the operator is collecting cluster metadata
    When accessing the Kubernetes API
    Then it should use read-only list and get operations
    And it should NOT create, update, or delete any resources
    And it should NOT modify cluster state

Rule: Collection intervals are configurable with minimums enforced
  Example: Configuring collection intervals
    Given the operator is installed via Helm
    When configuring collection intervals
    Then intervals should be configurable via Helm values for testing/debugging
    And default intervals should match documented values
    And the operator should enforce minimum intervals to prevent abuse
    And intervals shorter than minimums should be rejected
    And configured intervals should be logged for monitoring
    And Helm overrides should be reported to kube9-server for monitoring

Rule: Collections use random offsets to distribute load
  Example: Cluster metadata collection scheduling
    Given multiple operators are running in different clusters
    When scheduling cluster metadata collection
    Then each operator should use a random offset
    And collections should be distributed across the collection window
    And the offset should be consistent for each operator instance

Rule: Collection errors are handled gracefully
  Example: API error during collection
    Given the operator is collecting data
    When an error occurs during collection
    Then the operator should log the error
    And the operator should retry after the next interval
    And the operator should not crash or stop operating
    And the error should be tracked in collection metrics
```

Commit message:

Implement Resource Configuration Patterns Collector for kube9-operator, completing the third of five data collectors. This update includes the collection of resource configuration data at 12-hour intervals, with enhancements for data storage, error handling, and integration with existing collection infrastructure. Update related documentation and mark story status as completed.

ai/features/data-collection/index.md, after:

---
feature_group: kube9-operator-data-collection
---

# Data Collection Features

## Background

```gherkin
Background:
  Given the kube9 operator is running in a Kubernetes cluster
  And the operator has read access to cluster resources
  And the operator is configured with collection intervals
  And the operator can run in free tier (operated) or pro tier (enabled) mode
```

## Rules

```gherkin
Rule: Data collection stores raw data locally
  Example: Raw data collection
    Given the operator is collecting data
    When data is collected
    Then the raw, unsanitized data should be stored locally in the operator pod
    And the data should include actual resource names and configurations
    And the data should NOT leave the cluster during collection
    And the data should be available for verification and future processing

Rule: Data sanitization is a separate future phase
  Example: Future Pro tier data transmission
    Given the operator has collected raw data locally
    And the operator is running in pro tier (enabled mode) with obfuscation library implemented (future)
    When preparing data for transmission to kube9-server
    Then the data should be sanitized using the obfuscation library
    And real names should be replaced with mock equivalents
    And the sanitized data should be validated against schema
    And the sanitized data should be transmitted to kube9-server via HTTPS POST
    And the transmission should include API key authentication
    
  Note: Sanitization, obfuscation library, and transmission are future features not yet implemented

Rule: All collections use read-only operations
  Example: Cluster metadata collection
    Given the operator is collecting cluster metadata
    When accessing the Kubernetes API
    Then it should use read-only list and get operations
    And it should NOT create, update, or delete any resources
    And it should NOT modify cluster state

Rule: Collection intervals are configurable with minimums enforced
  Example: Configuring collection intervals
    Given the operator is installed via Helm
    When configuring collection intervals
    Then intervals should be configurable via Helm values for testing/debugging
    And default intervals should match documented values
    And the operator should enforce minimum intervals to prevent abuse
    And intervals shorter than minimums should be rejected
    And configured intervals should be logged for monitoring
    And Helm overrides should be reported to kube9-server for monitoring

Rule: Collections use random offsets to distribute load
  Example: Cluster metadata collection scheduling
    Given multiple operators are running in different clusters
    When scheduling cluster metadata collection
    Then each operator should use a random offset
    And collections should be distributed across the collection window
    And the offset should be consistent for each operator instance

Rule: Collection errors are handled gracefully
  Example: API error during collection
    Given the operator is collecting data
    When an error occurs during collection
    Then the operator should log the error
    And the operator should retry after the next interval
    And the operator should not crash or stop operating
    And the error should be tracked in collection metrics
```
